---
layout: page
title: Test-time training-free personalized text-to-image diffusion model
description: a personalized diffusion model that does not require training/finetuning during test-time
img: assets/img/projects/pt2i_bg.png
importance: 1
category: work
related_publications: false
images:
  compare: true
  slider: true
---

Inspired by the potential of models like DreamBooth, we initiated a proprietary project to train personalized text-to-image models capable of generating high-quality images that closely aligned with both input prompts and ID images. Unlike DreamBooth, our model was designed to eliminate the need for additional training during testing time, making it more efficient for commercial applications.

I played a crucial role in research and developing this model. My responsibilities included selecting and implementing the network architecture, training the PoC model, and participating in the construction and improvement of the training dataset.

Our model owns several advantages against prevalent methods at that time. Specifically,

1. Does not require training during test-time. Therefore, it only takes about 20 seconds to generate an image (tested on V100 GPU), significantly faster than other methods such as LoRA DreamBooth or Textual Inversion
2. Requires only a single input photo of the subject
3. Generate personalized images of which quality and fidelity are comparable to those of DreamBooth
4. Generate images that align well with the input prompts

In the video below, a colleague from my team introduces the project at [if(kakaoAI)2024](https://if.kakao.com/), a developer conference hosted by Kakao Corp.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.liquid path="https://www.youtube.com/embed/uGU-pvHx5oU" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

By the start of 2024, the commercialization of this project resulted in an [AI service](https://pf.kakao.com/_GGxjhG) that garnered over 100,000 users in South Korea before being discontinued due to the company's strategic shift. Below are some samples which were generated by our model.

<div class="row">
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        <swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_male.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_female.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        </swiper-container>
    </div>
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Identities are well-preserved in the images generated by our models given variety of input prompts and concept images
</div>

<div class="row">
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        <swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_textalign_male.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_textalign_female.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        </swiper-container>
    </div>
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Our model can generate images that align well to the input prompts containing description of facial expressions 
</div>

<div class="row">
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_textalign_1.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <!-- <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0"></div> -->
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Our model can generate images that align well to the input prompts containing description of view directions and accessories
</div>
