---
layout: page
title: personalized avatar generator
description: utilize a 3DMM parameter prediction model to construct personalized 3D avatars
img: assets/img/projects/avatargen_bg.png
importance: 4
category: work
related_publications: false
---

In this project, I developed a method that allows for the rapid creation of a 3D avatar model from a single human face image. Furthermore, the generated 3D avatar is compatible with the [ReadyPlayerMe](https://readyplayer.me/) structure and can be immediately applied to virtual environments in games, VR, or AR. The image below illustrates the input and output of the aforementioned avatar generation system.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/avatargen_results.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The inset in the upper left corner is the sole input, and the bottom row presents the 3D avatar generated by the system.
</div>

The system is built on a deep learning model that can guess the 3DMM parameters of the images. I found that using a pre-trained model like Deep [Deep 3D Face Reconstruction](https://github.com/microsoft/Deep3DFaceReconstruction) is sufficient to make sure the 3D face model looks like the original image.

The primary contribution of this project is how we can map the 3DMM parameters predicted by [Deep 3D Face Reconstruction](https://github.com/microsoft/Deep3DFaceReconstruction) to the 3DMM parameters compatible with [ReadyPlayerMe](https://readyplayer.me/), as illustrated in the image below.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/avatargen_3dmm.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

I successfully resolved this problem by applying Deformation Transfer techniques, which involve copying the deformation of a source 3D mesh onto a different target 3D mesh. For more information on Deformation Transfer, please refer to [Deformation Transfer for Triangle Meshes](https://people.csail.mit.edu/sumner/research/deftransfer/)
