---
layout: page
title: Improving the personalized text-to-image diffusion model
description: rebuild the personalized text-to-image diffusion model using more powerful architectures and upgraded dataset
img: assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_bg.png
importance: 0
category: work
related_publications: false
images:
  compare: true
  slider: true
---

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_bg.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

The image above presents examples generated by the enhanced version of the [personalized text-to-image diffusion model](/site/projects/work_pt2i). This model was developed by reconstructing key components of its previous version, including the backbone models and the identity conditioning architecture. These enhancements significantly improved critical capabilities of the previous version, such as identity and text alignment. Furthermore, the new model introduces additional features, including support for multi-aspect-ratio image generation and the ability to control head poses. The image below provides a summary of the changes and improvements in this enhanced model.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_whatsnew.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<!-- <div class="caption">
    An overview of the changes made and the improvements resulting from those changes in the enhanced personalized diffusion model
</div> -->

The remainder of this post introduces several practical applications of the model and showcases its performance in generating personalized images.

## Applications

---

### Put your image in any style

Given an input portrait photograph, our model is capable of generating a new portrait of a similar identity in a different style, while preserving the original head pose, position, and image aspect ratios. In below examples, the leftmost images are the input images.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_0.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<br/>

### Put your identity in any style

As expected, the model is able to generates person images in various styles while maintaining strong identity alignment with the input facial image.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        <swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_1.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_2.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
        </swiper-container>
    </div>
</div>

<br/>

### Put your identity in any expression

Our model generates images with varying facial expressions while maintaining consistency across them.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_6.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<br/>

### Capable of controlling head orientation

Our model natively supports image generation conditioned on specific head orientations.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_3.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<br/>

### Robust to unrealistic input identities

Even with unrealistic input images, our model maintains high identity alignment in the generated images.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_4.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

<br/>

### Capable of processing multiple input identity images to improve identity alignment

A new feature supported by this model is the ability to process multiple input images. Our experiments show that increasing the number of input images improves the identity alignment of the generated images.

<div class="row">
    <div class="mx-auto col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/projects/pt2i_ver2_5.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
